---
layout: post
title:  "Paradise Lost: A rant"
date:   2012-02-14 20:27:40
---


 Satan and God are pretty much equals. If you imagine God as a King and Satan as his right hand man then you’d understand. Satan and God are both equally powerful, but God is currently ruling. Satan leads a rebellion which is quashed after a long battle and him and his men are banished to a wasteland of suffering and depression. Satan can’t apologise because of pride, but also because he’s angry that he’s been punished so harshly. It’s not like he’s been killed, it’s much worse. God has completely ruined Satan, burned and disfigured him, and left him in a lake of fire which is basically a manifestation of hate and sadness. Dick move by God. It makes it so much harder to forgive God if you’re in the manifestation of hate. As for the pride thing, Pride is the sin of thinking you’re better than God. If you go back to seeing God and Satan as two great men but God as the one in charge, does God have any more right to rule than Satan? Not really. 

Satan is demonised later, yes, but he has to be. He covets gold, is vicious, full of pride etc, but it is only to show how the pain and suffering has deformed him. The fall from heaven doesn’t just change Satan’s visage, it changed his soul. And whose fault is this? GOD. This is determinism right here. God created Satan knowing full well that he’d have to make his life a misery and he would become evil. You say that Satan could apologise and re-enter heaven. NO HE CAN’T.

God is omnipotent, he knows that Satan is going to overrule him and he knows that Satan will never apologise. God makes Satan, knowing that he will one day try unsuccessfully to overthrow him, and then makes him too full of pride to apologise.  He says Satan can return to heaven if he apolises but he know full well that he never will. He even goes as far to create a plane of eternal suffering before Satan even has a chance to start scheming the uprising. First though he lets Satan live in the most wonderful place in the universe, for a short while, before putting him in the worst place in the universe. Not to mention also punishing 75% of his Angels, as well as Satan, for defying him (which he also knew they’d do as he was creating them). 
Basically God makes a load of Angels in full knowledge that he will make them miserable for eternity after having shown them the greatest thing ever. Why did he do it? Because God needs to sacrifice them to have something serve as a temptation for humans. So not only that, but he sets humans up to be tempted/ damned as well. If you sin it is because Satan tempts you. God created Satan and his minions to do this. God has sent YOU to hell. Determism. Satan and his band of evil angels are as screwed over as you are.
But you aren’t screwed over. God loves you because you’re a protestant. Protestantism had always said that God already knew who was chosen and who was not. If you had faith, you’d go to heaven is what people were told. So you aren’t screwed.  

 Or are you? You did just side with Satan.

As a C16th Christian, which you are, you remember you just sympathised with Satan and thought for a short moment that God is a douchebag. The point is that Milton has tricked you into siding with Satan for long enough to prove how convincing Satan can be. Milton is showing not what a great guy Satan is , but what a bumbling heretic YOU are. Paradise Lost was written to prove that YOU, the reader, are the real sinner. Milton shows you how easy it is to fall for Satan’s antics. It is basically a warning for you to watch out for sin. It’s okay though, have faith and go back to being someone who goes to heaven. 

It was a nice little trick to show how humans are flawed.

Milton was a Calvinist, he wants you to feel like a sinner because that’s what Calvinism is all about. He makes a very convincing argument for Satan so as to trap YOU THE READER. Of course you’re supposed to  side with God at the end. Milton basically wrote his first book in a light which favours Satan as a ‘you lost the game’ joke, the rest of the books are him licking God’s shoes again because he wasn’t a heretic, he was devout. Fine the rest of the books make out that Satan is bad, but it doesn’t mean the points in the first book aren’t entirely correct.

But that doesn’t mean that God isn’t being a dick. He totally is being a dick. Just because the rest of the books aren’t so flattering to Satan, it doesn’t mean that ultimately suffering isn’t completely God’s fault. HE was the one who was being an asshole whilst he was creating shit. Calvinists never really cared about those who didn’t always have faith in God because they were wrong, but nowadays I’d say most people would be more inclined to continue to see God as the bad guy. Back then you’d think “OH SHIT, gunna have to repent hard now. Oh Milton, you got me.” Now you’d probably still feel sympathy for Satan because you haven’t been taught from birth not to fall for Satan’s sneaky tricks and you also desperately want to go to heaven.