---
layout: post
title:  "Bar culture"
date:   2013-11-30 20:27:40
---

Western bar culture is a collection of habits and norms displayed by a number of subcultures which are served by a variety of establishments. Examples of the relationship between subculture and establishment vary widely, from a farmer who drives his pick-up to a smokey pool hall to the college student on a packed dance floor. However, bars all have one thing in common and that is offering an environment pleasing to people who are mildly to extremely intoxicated, usually from consuming liquids containing ethanol produced by the fermentation of various kinds of fruits and grains.

The effect of consuming several alcoholic beverages (that is, beverages that contain ethanol) is a general lowering of inhibition, which manifests itself in a number of social behaviors. First, people become more open to socializing (or, as a new study suggests, less likely to register off-putting social ques) and so bars are a place where conversations between people who have never met before often occur, sometimes in a completely platonic sense and sometimes as a pre-mating ritual. In fact, Western bar culture is used by some people as a way of finding a mate, be that for a single act of copulation or a more long term engagement.

Secondly, there are a number of activities performed at bars that accompany the consumption of alcoholic beverages that break down primarily in to two groups: dancing and lounge sports. In the West, dancing is a stigmatized activity (though some subcultures have less of an aversion to it). One is encouraged to believe that a natural, rhythmic moving of the body is not adequate and, in some cases, this inadequacy is tied to race. When inhibition is lifted by consumption of alcohol, people are more likely to dance spontaneously and without feeling self conscious. This has given rise to a special type of bar known as the "club" (sometimes known as a discotheque outside of the United States).

Club dancing is a special behavior in and of itself. Upwards of 200 individuals may be on a dance floor at a time and, in some instances, will begin to dance with a person of the opposite sex (or in some bars a person of the same sex) in a way that mimics copulation. Often, these two people have never met before. This can be an initiation to an evening that ends in a single act or series of acts of copulation between these two individuals, know as a "one night stand." For some people, this is the goal of visiting a bar or club.

The second activity mentioned above, lounge sports, are lightly competitive games often played among friends or, possibly, in a tournament style among skillful individuals. These sports include billiards (pool), darts, various card games and punching machines. Of these, billiards is by far the most popular and many bars are specifically devoted to this lounge sport, featuring upwards of 20 pool tables. While clubs draw in large crowds with loud music and expensive, stylized presentations of alcoholic beverages, pool halls often feature cheap alcoholic beverages in large quantity and tend to inspire loyalty in their patrons, rather than riding the latest fashion.

So, that is a brief overview of the major instantiations of Western bar culture, at least as experienced in Sweden, Europe and the US. There are many, many variations and it would take an entire volume to adequately explore them all. 