---
layout: post
title:  "Understanding books and their context"
date:   2014-05-30 20:27:40
---

Honestly, if your goal is to get a lot out of so-called canonical literature then one pretty straightforward step to take is to understand the historical context of the book.  Don Quixote is funny by itself, but takes on much more philosophical significance when you understand how smart a satire it was of knights-errant stories.  Another example of this: I honestly don't understand how anyone can make it 20 pages through The Divine Comedy without understanding that Europe was crawling put of The Dark Ages, which required a really uneasy fusion between Christian culture (the only sinew holding an otherwise fractured Europe together) and the oftentimes contradictory culture of classical antiquity.  Learning a little about the society for whom the work was written adds many dimensions of detail that are sometimes necessary just to understand the book, let alone enjoy it.

Second, don't be intimidated.  Great books have withstood the test of time, not because they're stodgy and possess the dignity of being an old thing, but because they continue to be dramatic and alive despite their age.  Great books connect us to the past by demonstrating that certain kinds of human concerns are timeless.

Third, the simplest answer is: just look for patterns.  Your brain is designed to find them, so you'll be surprised how easy it is if you just relax and have fun with it.  Yes, you'll find patterns that the author never intended, but that's okay.  That's actually great!  A book isn't a code you're supposed to figure out, it's a device that helps you think and feel things.  Use it however you want, it's yours, after all.

I've read a pretty good chunk of the canon and I don't hate popular literature, if anything I like it more because I think it's amazing that we live in a society in which so much art is produced, even if some of it is bad and a lot of it is just okay.  It's unprecedented in history that so many people would have the time and education to express themselves at all.  I wouldn't trust a food critic who was incapable of admitting that, while The French Laundry is better, In-N-Out Burger is also pretty god dammed delicious.

Analyzing literature doesn't just enhance the great works, or even just literature.  All storytelling is better when you really take the time to think about all it's moving parts.  Again, just look for patterns.  In Game of Thrones, to give one popular example, what might the author be trying to suggest about the people in his world by associating many of them with animals (their crests, nicknames, etc.)?  Maybe that this is a brutal world, red in tooth and claw.  Did the author do this on purpose?  In this case, in my view, probably, but if not who cares?  I just added to my experience of the story by crystallizing that pattern in my mind.

A couple final words of caution.  Don't fall into the trap of thinking that you're entitled to your opinion.  I mean, of course you are, but 99% of the time when I didn't enjoy a work that was considered great the first time I read it it was because I hadn't understood yet what others saw in it.  The great books that speak to you right away, that feel like the author is reaching out to you personally over the decades and centuries to exquisitely verbalize something you never even knew had been on the tip of your tongue your whole life, are of incalculable value, but in some ways the ones that make you work for it are even better.  It can be tedious, frustrating, and it can sometimes even feel pointless, but then, on page 270, something clicks, and the result is that you've just learned to see the world in a way that had never even occurred to you before.  And suddenly it isn't you that's gotten richer, it's everything else which is even more complex and manifold than before.